
 about domain experts interaction with intelligence systems. But today we will talk about health coaching. By the way, I collaborated with Martijn Willemsen and Wijnand Usselsteijn. And I'm from Eindhoven University of Technology.
 that is about a client seeking support for some health related goal, right? So it's really about having a problem and reaching out, hey, can something or someone help me with this.
 So this can either can be support from technologies, for example, the clients can download an app, or buy a wearable device.
 which might be a personal trainer or a dietician, or lifestyle coach. But in any case this is a client centered process where this question plays a central role, and someone seeking support and someone providing support.
 And then when we think about technology in health coaching it gets increasing attention, and it's also illustrated by many tracks here at Chi about health and technology.
 quantified self it's about, well, tracking, and by this tracking, giving insights.
 Health coaching is an interpersonal process, at least it's always been. And now technology might take over; might step into this. But it is about two people, two persons one helping the other. At least originally.
 So with this study we aim to move towards a better understanding of the social and the professional context of health coaching. And it might spark new insights into the development of technology in this field.
 So, we set out with these research questions.
 So in the beginning of the study we, without even talking about technology, wanted to understand what defines and influences successful health coaching.
 we did three qualitative studies
 where in the beginning we aimed to explore the coaching process in general.
 So we deliberately did not talk about technology in this first study. We did interviews with nine coaches, which were either personal trainers or dieticians, so focusing on physical activity or nutrition. Mostly both, by the way.
 What can technology do for you? Basically, that was the main question.
 interact with technology. So we had this gradually approach where we let them interact with self-tracking data and clients, and see what happens.
 of the results, and not extensively, because I want to save enough time to discuss the results. I think that's the most interesting part. But to give you an idea, so we did the thematic analysis in all the three studies. And for the first study that result is in three main themes
 where coaching is about. And I will illustrate most of them through an illustrating quote. So the first thing we found that the coaches reflected on was that success goes often beyond achieving goals.
 that there's often a more profound issue underlying a stated goal. So for example, this coach explains that. She said, "the first impression is that "someone wants to lose weight. "But in my experience it's never about that. "It's really about somebody fighting "something within themselves. "So it's my role as a coach to understand "which emotions are there, and to be sensitive." So that really already gives an idea about what they think that health coaching is about.
 the value of the personal approach. And one of the subthemes there was the tailoring advice, and also the tailoring the coaching style is very important, and also implicit. So one of the coaches explained, "I'm always looking for the things that a clients needs. "What motivates him, helps him, triggers him, or maybe just "reassures him at this moment." And when we further probed, like okay, so what is it that you do? How do you tailor? What client features do you look for? And they said, "Well, "it's mostly just a gut feeling. "It's just years of experience, you know. "I know what to do, but I couldn't make this explicit." Which we thought was interesting.
 And they also talked a lot about adapting the advice to situational characteristics. And related to this they said that contextual information of the client is very informative to them. So this was, I think, very funny when coach explained that she asks her clients to make a food journal. And she said, "It says it all. "Some people forget it, then you know they're not motivated. "Some write it very sloppy, others very tidy, "including the times. "Others bring food to the consultation meeting, "or make pictures." So she said, "It's not only the information itself, "but also the way it's presented is very informative." Now this already highlights some implications for technology. But in the second study we also talked about this technology
 with the coaches. So we basically asked, what can technology do for you? What would you like to outsource, and what would you like to do yourselves, and why?
 and I will discuss a few. So the first one is, well,
 not very surprising, you would say. They say, "Well, "technology can help me giving more "and better quality information." So they say, for example, "At the start "of a coaching process, I want to know many things "and I only get half of that. "So that would be something that technology "can support me with." On the other hand, they also said, "Well, I don't want technology to distract "from the interaction with the client, "because that's the main thing in the coaching process "and I don't want it to take over that, "or to distract from that." And related to this one coach, made this interesting quote. She said, "What makes us human's unique "and what makes us sensitive to each other, "and if we outsource that to technology "we lose a lot of human strength. "And that idea scares me." So she really was thinking about, well, I don't want to outsource everything, because there's something that I think is valuable to just do as a human. And then the last example from this study. They talked a lot about limitations of data, and negative psychological effects. So for example, they said, "clients tend to stare obsessively "at the numbers on their device, "But it is not about the data, "it's about what you do with it. "So it's our role as a coach "to learn them to listen to their bodies." So this illustrates that they basically saw themselves as a sort of gatekeeper. They wanted to be in control of when to use the data, and how to use the data, and also sometimes just hide it. They said, "Well I just want to use it effectively, "that it motivates, and not that it demotivates "over-excessively.
 They talked a lot about limitations of data, and negative psychological effects. So for example, they said, "clients tend to stare obsessively "at the numbers on their device, "But it is not about the data, "it's about what you do with it. "So it's our role as a coach "to learn them to listen to their bodies." So this illustrates that they basically saw themselves as a sort of gatekeeper. They wanted to be in control of when to use the data, and how to use the data, and also sometimes just hide it. They said, "Well I just want to use it effectively, "that it motivates, and not that it demotivates "over-excessively.
 And in the last study, we did more hands on work with technology with the coaches.
 and we invited two clients with their self-tracking data, just to give it a try, see what happens, if you actually work with it. And half of the coaches were talking to these clients, and the other half were consulting their self-tracking data. We asked all groups to come up with a coaching advice,
 with all coaches, and we reflected together on what is the added value of talking to the client and what's the added value of the self-tracking data, and how does it impact the coaching advice.
 that information is both hidden and revealed through behavioral data. And the coaches themselves concluded, more or less, they said, "Well, data helped the coach "to ask the right questions."
 That's fine. I will do this slide as well. I thought if I would be late then I would skip this one, but I think it's very relevant. So when we compare the coaching advice from the two parallel groups,
 coaches consulting the self-tracking data the coaching advice was much more specific. So, for example, they would say to this particular client, "Use your heart rate zones, in your trainings." Because they saw that she was going into the very highest heart rate zone, stayed there for the whole training, and then stop. So they could make it very specific because they knew this, they just see it in the data. And also quite situated. So, for example, they said, "Well, why don't you try this running trail? "Use the bridge here, for stretching, and then return." Because they could have a look in her GPS data. So, specific and situated that was typical for that group.

 is focusing on understanding and supporting the clients. And this is fine, of course. Let's be honest, this is the main goal of health coaching.
 and think about what constitutes good coaching, in the first place, and also, what are the coaches needs. This might shed new light on technology in health coaching, so let's see what the three studies have learned us, in this regard.
 on both behavior and experience. So we illustrated with a two channel communication, yeah, two channel communication, sorry. And the coaches stated, and I think we have to agree,
 more information on behavior, because it's simply easier to measure. And they said, "Well, it's not really sufficient. "Experience is also very important. "Behavior only is also often not meaningful, "especially in lifestyle, or wellbeing fields. "I mean, if you sleep six hours a night, "and you feel fine, then it's fine. "Or if you drink only one cup of water a day and you feel fine. "So it's much more about the experience that explains "which behavior is good or not. "But just looking at the behavior, we don't know. "It's hard to have a normative judgment, sort of." So they said this is really key to have this experience.
 And therefore, a lot of times they reflected on I wanted to stay in the loop. I want to be in control on how to use this technology and the resulting data towards the clients.
 Now if this is the case, if coaching is indeed going beyond behavior,
 "is a meaningful activity in itself. "Let me do that together with the clients." It's a nice trigger of sharing these experiences. It's also cue for meaningful interaction,
 from what's technically possible to what's happening in this relation, and then from there started with what the added value of technology might be. And the shift, and it's very important, I think,

 is that, for instance, if a coach is saying, "I want control "of this data, or the quality of their food journal tells me something about their level of motivation. - Versus somebody who is qualified, who might say, "Actually, what's the most important part of "the coaching experience is the history "of the person coming in,
 "and also this sense of how do I know when my client "actually succeeds?" - Yeah. - Am I supposed to be with them forever? Those kids of things I would encourage you to consider. Speaking as a professional coach. - (chuckles) Yeah. - To think about, in terms of who you ask to be your role model. Or thinking about this space. - Yeah. - 'Cause there's a lot crap.
