
 - Based on my talk, you might think I'm in the wrong session, but nevertheless, let's start. So my name is Nur, and I'm from RWTH Aachen University. I'm here with my colleagues, Adrian Wagner, Simon Voelker, and Jan Borchers. And this work was done in collaboration with Jürgen Steimle from Saarland University. And today, I will be talking about Springlets.
 So skin is our natural tactile interface with the physical world. It's unique in the way that it can recognize distinct sensations
 And in our daily lives, we rely on these sensations and touch gestures;

 to sense subtle cues, for guidance and warning;
 and to stay aware of our physical surroundings. Knowing how rich and expressive our tactile sensory is we wondered why don't wearables support touch gestures?
 Well, the short answer is hardware.
 For a long answer, let's look at what wearables contain.
 So most of our wearables, rarely, provide some kind of tactile feedback. It is vibration patterns on the skin and the reason is very famous is that vibration motors are quite compact, they are easy to integrate in a wearable form. They can be attached in different body locations. But if we are thinking about generating touch gestures,
 a motor that is strong enough to actuate and deform the skin. And a mechanical system attached to this motor that can transform this power into expressive movements and forces. And these combinations usually results in bulky, rigid and complex formatting patterns, and they are definitely more challenging to wear on most body locations but they are also hard to combine in a single wearable expressive interface. So to answer to these challenges, we developed Springlets.
 to generate a wide range of touch gestures.
 that allows them to be worn on the skin like stickers.
 Thanks to the silent operation of Springlets, they can be even worn near the head and the ear. To show you some of Springlets expressiveness, we developed six modular interfaces that generate different sensations. I will quickly show you the videos and I will describe them later when we talk about their design implementation.


 We then have our Presser. Pushing on the skin.
 And what makes Springlets unique, is that they are all driven using a single type of actuator. And that is the shape memory alloy spring that you see in this picture. Shape memory alloy springs are thin and flexible coils,

 As you notice, the movement they generate is quite smooth, yet powerful.
 If we compare Shape Memory Alloys to other electromechanical actuators, they would have a higher force-to-weight ratio. So they are lighter in weight to the amount of force they can present on the skin. And they also operate in complete electrical and mechanical silence. So no other additional adapting mechanism are required. Less work. Our main challenge in this project was to find out how to transform this simple contraction expansion movement into a range of expressive touch gestures. But before we talk about that, I would like to acknowledge
 the related work on Touch-tactile interfaces. These are interfaces that can generate sensation such as dragging, tapping, squeezing. And particularly interfaces that are already incorporated in Shape Memory Alloys,
 either to squeeze the skin or to tickle it.
 that we will talk about during this talk. How we design Springlets. How we fabricated Springlets. And eventually are Springlets really working? So the evaluation of them. Lets start with Design factors.
 We are going to show four design factors that help us, that help transform, the simple Shape Memory Alloy string that you just show, sorry you just seen into expressive Springlets.
 The first one is physical attachment techniques. And by that we mean the way an SMA is attached on the skin.
 We identified two techniques. In the first one, the SMA is directly attached to the skin. So when it moves, it actually actuates the skin under it.
 A haptic object. It can be a rigid object or a soft object. It can be large or small. And the idea is when the traction happens, contraction causes the object to transform either by changing its shape in one form or another. And this technique in particular, expands the design space of Springlets. Imagine the type of objects you can attach and the type of transformations you can achieve with an single contraction expansion.
 The second nuance factor is bias force. And bias force is necessary working with SMAs, because they can contract with current, but when they relax, they relax super slowly. So you do need a resistant force to pull them back to their stretch length, to allow repeated contractions. In Springlets, bias force also contributes to the distribution of force on the skin. So in this example,
 we have one point of this interface larger than the other. So one attachment point is larger. Which means that the bias force that the skin elasticity is causing at one point is larger. So the SMA will easily contract and switch the other point when creating a directional stretcher.
 Another source of bias force can be the attached object itself. So in this example, we are using a bendable object. During contraction, it pushes the skin, and during expansion, it is responsible for extending and pulling the spring back to its elongated form.
 well in this case, this is our expanding object, we just embed it with a simple passive spring. So the spring will help pull the SMA back to elongation.
 Alternatively, we can use an active spring, for example, another SMA. Here we are connecting the object with two SMAs instead of one. And this allows us to have better position control and bi-directional control. Our third design factor is angle.
 This means the angle between the SMA and the skin and the SMA and the attached object,
 So in this illustration, we manipulated the angle
 in order to split the single force of stretch into two force vectors. One is normal and the other is tangential. In this case, that also means that the friction of the skin is now a bias force that is working against us and should be considered in design.
 Finally, our fourth design factor is the dimensions of the SMAs themselves. Simply put, if you have a bigger SMA,
 one with a larger diameter, it will give you larger force. If you have a longer SMA, it will give you larger displacement. In the first example, we are using a larger SMA that is one and half larger in diameter than in the Dragger example. But it generates three and half times the force. Both of these SMAs contract to 50 percent of their elongated length during actuation. So a longer SMA definitely translates the object further.
 how did we implement these design factors into a physical form factor. And we will talk about Springlets design and sticker structure, but before that we set to ourselves two goals. This structure need to be effective and efficient. And so the Springlet should be able to use all the power that a SMA provides to actuate the skin or an object on the skin. And the structure needs to be ergonomic.
 We developed a three layer structure.
 we used it only as a protection. So it protects the user from the SMA, and the SMA from the user. And this layer is made of silicon-rubber. This is the same material that we are using in our making force. So it is very skin-friendly, stretchable and heat resistant. And that is important because the SMA do heat up quite a bit. Up to 70 degrees Celsius when contracting.
 This is where our objects and our SMAs will live. And the shape of this layer determines how large the displacement is and how it is going to be attached to the skin.
 And for that we used Kinesio Medical Tape. It is very stretchable and breathable and super thin. And it also can withstand some of the heat of the SMA. But it cannot prevent it from reaching the skin so we did add a layer of heat barrier. Overall, if we stack all these together,
 assuming a 1.4 millimeter SMA inside and a very flexible shape.
 We'll talk about combining them in a minute.
 So evaluation, are Springlets actually working? Well I would first like to invite you to come and test them in our demo, but before you do, I will like to show you some numbers. So we created, we had a little subject study with ten participants, three female,
 and we asked them to wear three Springlets. These are representative Springlets, we have one that stretches the skin, one that pushes and one that deforms an object on the surface.
 different curvatures, sensitives and elastic resistance.
 while they are sitting down and while they are standing. So we got around one thousand data points. And the results are as following:

 In terms of expressiveness, what data tells us is that if a user finds a springlet to be noticeable, between 4 or 5 on a 5 point Likert scale, they are 73% more likely to figure out the right sensation it produces. This breaks down, however, if the interface, or the Springlet is not mounted correctly on the skin. Simply put, imagine the dragger or the presser, or one of these Springlets attached on body hair. If they are not completely adhered to the skin itself, they will pull the hair. They will be painful and they will feel more like a stretcher and that's what exactly happened in our study.
 are they intrusive? are they easy to wear? are they light weight? And for all of these answers, we got a positive reply. The average was 4.2 on a 5 point Likert scale in terms of comfort. Some users thought that they almost forgot that they were wearing Springlets. We had two exceptions for this rule. Especially for our male users who had body hair
 I will talk very very quickly on three, four applications. And I will leave the rest for you to read in the paper.
 Okay, so in conclusion, today we talked about Springlets which are the first tactile interfaces to generate a wide range of expressive touch gestures in a thin and flexible form pattern. We show how highly flexible they are. How customizable they are. And how easy it is to combine and control them using current. Um, that concludes my talk and I am happy to answer your questions. (Audience applauds) - [Chair] You have 2 minutes for questions. If you have any questions, please come here and speak into the microphone. - [Audience 1] Oliver Schneider, Ireland. Great work, so when you looked as expressivity, you looked at different physical devices, right? Where as in your application areas, I saw that you were varying the signal like speed and different attributes and such. What kind of expressivity makes that from the different input signals to given Springlet? So how much expressivity do you have if you have a single thing on your body and you want to play around with different signals? - So we do we do have control over force profiles. Um, you either can control the force of a single Springlet a SMA Springlet, or you can use parallel springs so you can get a wider range. You could also control movement, so just by cutting the current earlier you can make them stretch less or more. But beyond that, the most expressive part of this is the ability to join more than one modular Springlet in one interface. Like we show in our Navigator example. - [Audience 2] A quick follow up. Do you have positive controls? Is it all in the - Ah yeah, that is future work. - [Audience 2] Okay (Audience laughs) - [Chair] Well, thanks again for your amazing talk. (Audience applause)
