
 Hi everyone! I am Jan Kučera from Open Lab at Newcastle University and I would like to invite you to have a look at our paper,
 Bedtime Window: A Field Study Connecting Bedrooms of Long-Distance Couples Using Slow Photo-Stream and Shared Real-Time Inking, which I've been working on together with my colleagues Siân Lindley, James Scott and Patrick Olivier. One of the things that collocated partners experience, but is difficult to imitate in a long-distance relationship is the sharing of bedtime. You know, the time when you just woke up or when you're about to go to sleep. You are together in bed, talking, reading, playing on your phones. And we have seen in previous work, people have tried
 watching partners falling asleep over video chat.
 So targeting specifically this scenario of connecting remote partners during bedtime, we have designed this system, called Bedtime Window.
 It is an always-on system running on a dedicated device, that enables remote presence without the need of constant interaction. Now, the system has a couple of novel features.
 One thing you probably have already noticed is that this not a video channel.
 It takes and sends pictures only every 5 seconds. We call that slow photo-stream. The second feature we focus on in this paper is inking.
 Our system supports real-time, disappearing inking using single, shared layer. Let me show you. Touching the display almost anywhere allows you to draw simultaneously on your and your partner's display. You can choose from couple of colours, brush sizes, but also the durations. Each stroke is associated with a time for which it lasts,
 and you can set this to be a day, an hour, a minute or just a single second. Finally, the shared layer means that whoever draws last, wins.
 That allows you to overwrite or annotate each other’s creations. You might be also wondering how we managed to convince people to put always-on displays in their bedrooms and sleep next to them... Well, building on our previous work,
 we gave them an option to make the display look more like a paper.
 So, these guys are RGB sensors, and they sense light in the surrounding environment, and the display tries to match it.
 That allows us to not only adapt to warm light, like this table lamp, but also, when you go to sleep and turn off the lights, the display simply follows.
 We deployed Bedtime Window to five couples in a long-distance relationship, for about four weeks. Most of the participants really enjoyed the system,
 and they thought that it had a positive impact on their relationship. Most participants also agreed that waking up and falling asleep together is an important part of their relationship.


 You can find all these and other results in the paper, but let me just highlight some of the more important findings. The slow photo stream raised a lot of discussions and reflection by our participants. Apart from the realizations that you can playfully stage the pictures,
 it turned out that it is able to balances the need for privacy and the feeling of remote presence. And participants were reporting the same qualities we already know from always-on video channels,
 except that we managed to achieve them without actually using video. As for the inking, that definitely was a success.
 People were using it for communicating, organizing,
 relationship maintenance, playing games, doing art, you name it. You know it's working when you prototype it with couple of strokes few sentences perhaps and then, participants come and do this, fill the whole screen with ink. For me personally, the most exciting part of this real-time, shared layer experience is the ability to annotate each other's drawings or writings,
