
 Hi, my name is Allison McDonald. Today I’ll be talking about our research on issues with  phone numbers and phone number recycling.
 Mobile phones have become an integral part  of our daily lives, and consequently, phone numbers have become a convenient and common  way for businesses and services to identify us. For many of us, our phone number is connected  to us across many platforms and companies. We may use our number for mobile messaging,  in connection to our bank account, on social media, and other personal activities.
 But phone numbers carry privacy risks, especially  when they’re used in ways we don’t expect. Over the last several years, there have been  many different news stories about phone numbers being abused. For example, governments may  use them to build networks of protestors, or to physically track someone. If your  phone number is recycled – that is, if someone else gets it when you stop using  it – the next owner may have access to your personal information, and might even  use that number to gain access to other accounts. So far, these problems with  phone numbers have been mostly anecdotal.
 With this study, we aimed to  comprehensively catalogue, what privacy, security and access  problems arise with the ubiquitous use of phone numbers and phone number recycling?
 To do this, we conducted a qualitative  elicitation survey with open-ended responses. We first asked a broad question about  “annoying, weird, or disturbing” experiences with phone numbers, and then followed  up with some specific questions about events we expected would trigger negative  experiences, like phone number recycling, loss of access to a phone number or a service, and  uncomfortable experiences sharing a phone number. We received 195 responses. I will  highlight some of the findings here.
 First, we identified five different categories of  negative experiences. I will give a few examples.
 Frequently, problems arise when a person loses  access to their phone number, perhaps because they can’t pay their bill or have moved internationally. Several participants described problems like this one, where the loss of a phone number  creates cascading access issues – for example, if an email is connected to a phone  number, the email becomes inaccessible when the phone number is inaccessible. Many people experienced phone  number recycling – in some cases, participants even described getting  access to significant personal data of the former owner. In this example, someone gained access to  the previous owner’s bank transactions, WhatsApp account, and received dozens of  phone calls meant for the previous owner. Sharing phone numbers could also  be very personal – participants described different situations in which  they did not want to share a number but were expected to,  for example with a deliver driver.
 We also identified the consequences participants  said they suffered. To give just two examples, ...
 when asked to share a number for  reasons they didn’t understand, participants expressed frustration or anger  at companies, and many said they didn’t trust companies to protect their information,  leading to an erosion of trust in the company as a whole. Dealing with the various problems  also had a significant emotional cost, from annoyance to fear, anxiety, and stress.
 Finally, we catalogued the different  ways participants described changing their own behavior to address these negative experiences and consequences. Here are some  examples to give you a sense of what we found.
 A surprising number of participants who had a  recycled phone number would go out of their way to help callers by telling them that they had the  wrong number --- with varying levels of success.
 Some participants, when forced to  give a phone number for a service, either could or would not, and were thus  unable to sign up or participate.
 Finally, many participants described some level  of resignation. Although they recognized that there is a cost to having their number shared  in so many places, they felt they had no choice.
 We make several recommendations. First,  governments can consider reducing the rate of phone number recycling by expanding  the space of available phone numbers. Companies, whenever possible, should allow  for alternate ways for users to be identified, like email and username. And finally,  both users and companies should opt out of SMS-based multifactor in  favor of more secure options.
 In conclusion, we found that phone numbers are not  always a reliable way to identify people. And even when they do serve as an identifier, phone numbers  are a privacy sensitive piece of information, offering direct ways to reach someone regardless  of the context in which the number was shared. And finally, we found that concern around  phone numbers takes a significant toll on people. I encourage you to read the  paper for more details. Thank you.
