
 Hello, my name is Kymeng Tang, and I'm a PhD student from KU Leuven, Belgium. Today I'm going to present a work on the role of technology to support breastfeeding that is part of my PhD research. This work was done together with my co-authors: Kathrin Gerling, Luc Geurts, and Katta Spiel. Breastfeeding brings many benefits for parents and children,
 although the process is often challenging. The adherence to recommended breastfeeding practices is determined by many factors,
 such as the ability to breastfeed and the intention to breastfeed, just to name a few. Many attempts to leverage technology to tackle barriers to breastfeeding have been made.
 For example, there are many systems that provide breastfeeding education and systems that support breastfeeding at a pragmatic level.
 There is a body of HCI research in breastfeeding and parenthood, however, there is no structured understanding of technology use in this space. In our work, we investigated the role and the potential of technology that support breastfeeding
 In our work, we investigated the role and the potential of technology that support breastfeeding through a two-step inquiry guided by the integrated behavioral model.
 We sought to answer our research questions: RQ1: What is parents’ anticipated or lived experience of infant feeding, and what are implications for the role of technology to support breastfeeding? RQ2: What are parents’ general perspectives on technology to support breastfeeding, how do they align with their preferences and needs across the feeding journey? In the first phase, we interviewed 12 participants about their lived or anticipated experience of feeding a child,
 In the first phase, we interviewed 12 participants about their lived or anticipated experience of feeding a child, and their perspective toward technology in this space. In the second phase, we then built upon the findings from the interview study and conducted an online survey study on breastfeeding and technology, which we received 175 responses.
 Analysis of the interviews and the survey responses shows that the lived breastfeeding experience is more complex than anticipated and is entwined with practical and emotional challenges along the feeding journey.
 Parents’ breastfeeding practice is heavily influenced by the society and the environment
 which set an expectation on how and when parents should feed their child. Technology in this space needs to embrace and adequately reflect the complexity of the lived experience.

 For postnatal technology, the systems need to provide flexible support throughout the feeding journey.
 There is also a potential for technology that target the wider society. Concerning parents' perspective toward technology,
 Concerning parents' perspective toward technology,
 participants were cautiously optimistic about the potential of technology in supporting breastfeeding
 with many of them already engaged with technology-based breastfeeding support. However, we recognize participants' sceptic about the potential of technology in providing practical support and there are also concerns about the credibility of the information provided. More generally, our work offers two points for reflection
 for technology that supports breastfeeding: The first concerns the relevance of the lived experience in technology design.
 Our data illustrates the complexity and the emotional conflicts of the lived breastfeeding experience,
 which requires parents to be resilient to these highly individual challenges. However, breastfeeding technology developed by the research community makes little reference to the lived experience. This risks presenting only factual information rather painting a complete multi-dimensional picture of the experience, and is a missed opportunity because technology could support parents in becoming resilient infant feeders. We speculate that the systems in this space could come in the form of mobile apps that are easily accessible for people who don't have any hands to spare.
 But we also want to highlight that these systems can only supplement problem solving, and that human support remains vital particularly in the early stage of breastfeeding. Secondly, our work highlights the impact of social and environmental factors on the feeding practice,
 while in many interventions, the burden to follow with breastfeeding is placed on parents. We argue that technology to support breastfeeding needs to engage a wider audience,

 and has to cast breastfeeding as a collective effort that includes partners, family and friends, but also wider society. For example, technology could leverage simulations to convey breastfeeding parents' needs
 to stakeholders such as policymakers and architects, so that they can reflect on how they shape the environment that breastfeeding parents find themselves in. There is also potential for technology design to normalize breastfeeding at the societal level. This entails technology that raises awareness about the feeding process and the right to breastfeeding in public. We hope that our work will inspire further research in this area, and we invite you to read our full paper for additional and more nuanced research insights. 68 00:04:59,000 --> 1193:07:46,286 Thank you very much!

