
 Hi everyone, I am Sharifa Sultana, from Cornell University. Today I will present our paper, “Unmochon’: A Tool to Combat Online Sexual Harassment over Facebook Messenger”. This work was done with a group of my collaborators from BUET, IUB, UofT and LUT.
 Women’s harassment often takes place over messenger Many Bangladeshi women often expose the harassers on social media with screenshots of their chats as supporting evidence and seek justice Victims’ attempts to seek help and justice often go in vain with the argument that the technology can manipulate screenshots Thus, Authenticity of the evidence is challenged So, we investigate -
 When and why do Bangladeshi women prefer exposing their online harassers, and what factors are significant while choosing possible online spaces for such actions? How do the existing tools, platform policies, and online environment often fail to assist them in this regard? How do they address the problems when their supporting evidence is challenged for authenticity? How can we design better tools and technologies to support online gender justice in this regard?
 First, we conducted a survey with 91 female Facebook users and interviewed 43 participants for a deeper understanding of their usual strategies to combat harassment. In the second phase, we designed Unmochon that supports the women who seek help and justice to their harassment. We built on the shame-based model of justice in this adversarial design. Then, we conducted the user-study with 48 participants.
 We found that women are often harassed by their family members, friends and colleagues. And harassers were more powerful at the workplace or had good images in the family. Thus, women did not find law and their institution much helpful. So, they rather chose to shame the harassers by exposing chat history. But the problem here was that screenshots of chat history can be forged and thus their evidence was often questioned.
 We contribute here through Unmochon. It consists of a chrome plug-in, a server, and a Facebook group. The plugin let the users capture the screenshot through it. Meanwhile it retrieves the unique Facebook user ID of the harasser and sends them to the server. The server puts an stamp of Unmochon on it, and sends it to the Facebook group as a post request. The group admins check the post-requests, accept them if relevant, or discard otherwise. During the user-study, we disconnected the server and the Facebook group, demonstrated the application through a video, and let the participants use the plug-in.
 Our first finding was that victim’s gender, social position, and other hegemony influence justice in Bangladesh. For example, one of our participants, who was a lawyer, shared a story of one of cases she recently handled in some debating society, where a female debater was harassed by her colleague. She explained, “Both of them submitted their chat history to the association. He added some chat histories to prove their past romantic relationship and claimed that the female colleague accused him to break his upcoming marriage. The association concluded that she was NOT harassed, but the male colleague should also have behaved himself." We also found that victims’ communication
 We also found that victims’ communication skills and storytelling matter while seeking justice. And even if the evidence was true, justice might still not be secured, as one of the participants explained, “Many patriarchal and conservative people are against women using Facebook since they think women meeting unknown people and losing their purdah go against their practicing Muslim ideology. They might say she invited it. So, even if she proves that the harassment was true, she might still fail to establish justice because of this blame."
 Sometimes harassers might make a case that victim seeking justice violated their privacy, as one of the participants shared her story, “...Then one day I logged into my Facebook profile at the university and proved that I did not manipulate it, he started countering me by saying whatever happened, he did it privately and yelled at me asking why did I invade his privacy in front of people. Do I really have to care about his privacy after he had done so much damage to my mental health?"
 Our study has several takeaways. First, Researchers working on gender harassment on social media often call for engaging women, especially gender harassment victims, in designing gender justice tools and techniques, Unmochon is a response to that call. We showed that proving the authenticity of the evidence might still not ensure justice as mob-sentiment, hegemonic legal consciousness, and many privacy challenges were associated with seeking justice. We argue that along with focusing on the users and their immediate needs, feminist-HCI and ICTD should also aim at supporting gender movements on social media and handle the above-mentioned political complexities.
 Second, We found that often friends and family members harass women online. Thus, they can’t not solvable it by just blocking the harasser. Victims often believe that their sporadically and locally organized small-scale protests might help them more than legal systems. We argue that technology should be designed to balance and bridge between social support and legal perspective to support the victims better.
 Third, Unmochon is designed based on transformative justice. Unmochon uses “shaming” which is an adversarial action towards punishing someone for their misconduct. It also pushes a person to reflect on what they have done from their social peers and repent for that. Thus, immediate punishment and long-term sustainable solution to gender justice might prevail.
