
 This paper reports on a study about fear of missing out and joy of missing out in a first-person, split-sphere 360° video. The video tells about gender inequality in the technology industry from a woman’s and a man’s perspective. The users experienced fear of missing out as concern and frustration over awareness of parallel events in the 360° sphere. But they also experienced feelings of joy and excitement about the availability of simultaneous events in the spherical view. To better understand how viewers’ experience of FOMO and JOMO changed over time, and how these two concepts were related,
 we explored these concepts in a repeated measures, between-subjects mixed methods experiment with 119 participants that took place in July-September 2018. The participants’ head rotation was tracked in the HMD. The HMD sensor recorded the yaw position of participants’ heads approximately 60 times per second.
 Figure 1 shows a visualization of these data. Participants were randomly assigned to watch the video in one of the four conditions: as a 360° split sphere in a HMD, freely choosing the FOV in the 360° sphere (Condition A, also called “Free choice”
 as a 360° split sphere in a HMD, in timed rotation to another FOV every 30 seconds (Condition B, “30-second timed rotation'”)
 as a 360° split sphere in a HMD, in timed rotation every 90 seconds (Condition C, “90-second timed rotation'')
 or as a half-sphere 180° film, seeing the film from start to finish from each perspective, with the backside of the video being blank (Condition D, “180° view”.)
 The four conditions represented different types of viewing experiences, where FOMO, JOMO, and presence could potentially vary.
 In the free choice condition (A), the user could freely rotate to choose the FOV in the 360° sphere to gain awareness of simultaneous event. In the timed rotation conditions (B and C), the user did not have the ability to choose the FOV but had awareness of simultaneous events. The two frequencies for alternating the FOV in Conditions B (every 30s) and C (every 90s) were chosen to vary the degree to which participants had access to simultaneous events occurring on the two sides of the spherical view. The 180° viewing modality (Condition D) provided a single perspective on the storyline from start to finish of a session. The viewer could then get the full story. Condition D provided a point of comparison for presence. Participants viewed the video twice and filled out a survey after each viewin
 We found that users experienced both FOMO and JOMO.
 FOMO was caused by the users' awareness of parallel events in the spherical view, but users also experienced JOMO. FOMO did not compromise viewers' sense of presence, and FOMO also decreased in the second viewing session, while JOMO remained constant. The findings suggest that FOMO and JOMO can be two integral qualities in an immersive video viewing experience and that FOMO may not be as negative a factor as previously thought. The participants described FOMO as both a constant feeling and an intermittent concern:
 “There was the constant sense that you might miss an important aspect of the story. At times, I was concerned that I had missed a key moment in the story that occurred on the other side.” “I could move wherever I wanted and could switch sides too. I liked that I was free to pay attention to whatever I wanted." These two quotes according to two of our participants. To further examine the relationship between FOMO and JOMO, we used Spearman’s rank correlation to analyze the association between FOMO and JOMO.
 There was a moderate, statistically significant negative correlation between FOMO and JOMO, indicating that as FOMO increased, JOMO decreased, and vice versa. Our findings suggest that a 360° video viewing experience can yield concern over missing out on important aspects of the story-line (FOMO), while also generating feelings of excitement about the freedom to choose the FOV and access to parallel events in the spherical view (JOMO). FOMO and JOMO can be seen as two sides of the same coin: both stem from the awareness of multiple options in the 360° sphere, which can prompt both negative and positive feelings. JOMO refers to joy at being able to choose from multiple options, whereas FOMO refers to concern about possibly missing out on important events. Both metrics are associated with the availability of multiple options.
